Civil partnerships can be converted to marriages from December



Same-sex couples will be able to convert their civil partnerships to marriages from December this year, the culture secretary has said.

Sajid Javid added that married transgender people will be able to change their legal gender without ending their marriage, provided their partner agrees.

He made the announcements after a consultation on what should happen to civil partnerships now same-sex couples have been allowed to marry since March.

It concluded that civil partnerships will continue to be available to gay couples but remain barred for opposite-sex couples.

To convert a civil partnership into marriage, a couple will have to attend a register office and sign a declaration that they wish to be married in front of a registrar.

Writing for PinkNews, Javid, who is also an equalities minister, said the change would take place from 10 December.

"This is something that many, many people have been clamouring for since the first equal marriages took place in March, and the final preparations are well underway.

"You don't have to have a big party to celebrate with all your friends and family, but I certainly won't try and stop you if you do."

Peter Tatchell, the equal rights campaigner, said it was great that same-sex couples in civil partnerships will be able to convert. But he accused David Cameron of "betraying the principle of equality" by refusing to allow opposite-sex couples to have a civil partnership.

"Same-sex couples now have a legal advantage over straight couples. They have two options: civil marriage and civil partnership. In contrast, opposite-sex couples have only one option: marriage. This is unjust and unfair," he said.

"The government's decision to retain civil partnerships is welcome. Not everyone wants to get married, given that marriage has a long sexist and homophobic history. It is right that all couples should have a choice."

There were more than 120,000 people in civil partnerships when statistics were last published in October 2013.

The option of civil partnership was much more popular than the government thought when it first brought in the legislation, and more than 7,000 were formed in 2012, according to the Office for National Statistics.

The government consultation in the wake of the new same-sex marriage legislation found three-quarters of respondents were against opening up civil partnerships to straight couples.

It said: "Several important organisations thought it was too soon to consider making changes to civil partnership - this should wait until we know the impact of extending marriage to same sex couples.

"Other organisations, in contrast, put forward a case for opening up civil partnerships to opposite sex couples now, for example because civil partnership and marriage were different relationships and couples should have equal access to both.

The government said it was too early to tell how much demand there would be for conversions and new civil partnerships among same-sex couples now they have the option of marriage.

"Given the lack of consensus on the way forward, the government will not be making any changes [ to civil partnerships]," it said.

https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jun/26/civil-partnerships-convert-marriages-december-transgender-same-sex