I’ve told my mum I’m transgender, but she ignored it. What now?



I am 18 and started identifying as a transgender boy when I was 15. Last year, I came out as transgender to my mother. She was very angry and upset, and said some unpleasant things. She made me promise to “stop being trans”. Since then, she has acted as if I never told her, and it hasn’t really come up.

My father has a mental illness and is also very uncommunicative. I’ve never discussed emotional things with him. He has transphobic views and I don’t think it has occurred to him that I’m thinking about my gender. I have no idea how he would react, but I’m certain he would be angry, would probably blame my mother and take it out on her, and maybe do something drastic.

In the past year, I have come out to most of the other students at school, and a few teachers. My being trans is almost common knowledge now, and most people call me by my preferred name as opposed to my birth name.

I am unsure whether I should come out again at home, either just to my mother or to both parents. (My younger sister knows and is supportive.) It is likely that, if I don’t tell them soon, they will find out from a third party. I also feel guilty about lying to them. On the other hand, I don’t know how they will react. They won’t kick me out, but they will make my life awful, and possibly ban me from cutting my hair or wearing men’s clothing (my mother threatened to do this before).

I have a good support system with my teachers, who think I should come out at home (but they don’t know much about my family situation). I will leave home in a year and am not sure whether it would be better or worse to wait until I have moved out to tell my parents.

I’m so sorry that your mum reacted the way she did, but the fact that she did so makes it even more important that you have a good support system outside your home.

Your parents cannot ban you from cutting your hair or wearing the clothes you want. You are 18 and an adult. Also, remember that your mum can’t really find out from a third party because she already knows, but has chosen not to acknowledge it.

I showed your letter to Dr Polly Carmichael, consultant clinical psychologist and director of the Gender Identity Development Service at the Tavistock and Portman NHS foundation trust. She has dealt with many families in this situation. She says: “Most often, parents are coming at it from a position of being protective of their children and wanting [what they think is] best for them.” She thinks that, maybe, when you told your mum it sparked a lot of fears about what she thinks it might mean for you.

Don’t forget, also, that you have had a few years to get used to this but, even if your mum had an idea, you confirming it may have been a shock. Identifying as trans means different things to different people – for some, it is a name change, for others surgery. Your mother may well have jumped to the most extreme idea of that, which may have been ultra-shocking for her and led to her shutting down.

“It’s obviously upsetting if you pluck up the courage to talk to family and the reaction is not one of total acceptance,” says Carmichael. “It sounds as if it’s important to have your parents on board, so it’s about thinking of ways to give your mother the space to voice her fears and concerns, but also protect yourself from being involved in discussions that make you feel very personally attacked.”

Carmichael wonders, if it isn’t too onerous a burden for your sister, if you might enlist her support? She suggests “small steps so you keep the conversation open with your mum, let her know that it’s still something that’s going on for you, but without getting into a big conversation about it [unless you both want to]. Maybe something like, ‘My feelings about my gender are still around’, so you keep it on the agenda.”

We appreciate this may not be easy: your mum’s reaction was heated and your concerns about your dad seem legitimate, so it sounds as if your mum’s support may be key in approaching your dad – knowledge and honesty is important, but so is safety.

The pressure to discuss it again seems to come from the fact you are moving out soon and you feel deceitful. Carmichael frames it in a different way. She says: “Instead of feeling deceitful, see it more as taking a thoughtful position, meeting your own needs but also thoughtful about the home you’re living in. There is no point putting yourself in an untenable situation.”

So it very much is an option to keep things as they are for now, and discuss it further when you leave home, or you could try to gently broach the subject with your mum sooner, if that seems viable. Only you can decide what works best for you. But you are not lying – you are being thoughtful.

Gendered Intelligence offers support and education to young trans people and their families – it runs various events where parents of trans people can meet other parents. It seems a big step for your mum now to attend such a thing, but Carmichael has seen the most reticent parents “do a complete volte-face – sometimes they can go on to become the biggest trans supporter.”

Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence

https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/sep/01/ive-told-my-mum-im-transgender-but-she-ignored-it-what-now