How I came out as a transsexual



I knew from when I was about six that I was different. I didn't know why, but I wanted to play with girls' things. I was told it wasn't allowed. I remember in the early 60s, when I was about 13, reading about April Ashley, the most famous British transsexual woman. Before that, I'd never heard the word "transsexual". The story was sensationalised and I was really afraid of being labelled a freak. After leaving school, I started an apprenticeship in the construction industry. I just got on with things and conformed.

I never thought I would meet anybody. There were relationships, but they never really worked. Then I met Gillian. I fell in love with her and thought, I'll get married, because I love someone. We had two daughters, five years apart.

Before my 40th birthday I became ill with pneumonia and a double pulmonary embolism. The doctor said that another 48 hours without treatment and I would have been dead. It made me realise that I had to stop living a lie, but the girls were only small and I had heard stories about people losing contact with their families. I wanted to be there while they were growing up, so I decided to wait.

I lasted another 12 years. My eldest was 22 and had just finished university. My youngest was finishing A-levels. I got to the stage where I was contemplating suicide. I felt I couldn't go on as I was any longer.

At Christmas 2000, I told the girls and Gillian. That was one of the most traumatic times. Gillian said: "I didn't realise you were a transvestite." I told her I was actually transsexual, and explained everything. We agreed that I would leave.

Then I had to break it to the girls. I remember sitting my elder daughter down and telling her, and she said: "I'll wake up in a minute – it's a nightmare." Next day, I took my younger daughter upstairs and told her and we came down crying in each other's arms. Then she ran out to tell her best friend – that was her way of coping.

Within a couple of weeks, I had moved out – Gillian helped me move. I never lost contact. The girls always stayed in touch. We would meet up somewhere neutral and gradually I started going back and seeing them at the house. At the time I explained to the girls what was happening and they listened. They didn't dismiss it.

They all came to know me as Carol. Gillian and I were divorced by the end of 2001. We're like sisters now. We've withstood so many pressures. She said the experience was like the grieving process because she was seeing the woman who had killed her husband.

Gillian has remarried. I've been on holiday with them. We get on wonderfully, we're like soulmates, even though the dynamics of the relationship have changed. Her husband has been great with me. And I probably get on better with my ex-mother-in-law now.

When it comes to introductions, they call me Carol and say I'm a close friend. Even with the girls, it's always Carol. I don't get Father's Day cards. My eldest said: "I can't buy you one of those cards when you look like that." I don't want Mother's Day cards, though; I'm not their mother, just the other biological parent.

I started living full-time as Carol in May 2001 because I was coming to the end of my college course and needed my records changed. I wanted to start a degree at the University of Sheffield that September as Carol.

I've had one short relationship since my transition; I've felt drawn to women all my life and becoming Carol hasn't changed that. I'm happy on my own but would like to find love again. That said, I feel very fortunate with friends. In my other life I never really had any, only acquaintances; I suppose I was afraid of people getting to know the real me.

My brother has never accepted Carol. When my younger daughter got married, he came to the reception and said hello but wouldn't talk to me. When my godmother died I was told two days after the funeral. Not everybody has been accepting.

I've been fortunate. People do lose their families. That's why I run workshops to educate people about what it is to be born with gender dysphoria.

People ask if I would prefer to be growing up now when perhaps it's easier but I say no – because I wouldn't have had the girls.

https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/26/transsexual-man-to-woman-carol-robson