My interview for Cleo magazine and why I did it



A first-person piece for a glossy, youth magazine is not my bread and butter, but I was given a compelling reason to do it. The initial email from Cleo said they wanted to find a way to respond to correspondence they get from younger readers who are questioning their identity and their gender. I could have done with something like that to read 10 years ago, I thought.

Since we did the interview, another reason to be a more visible role model has come up. With Caitlyn Jenner’s story on the cover of Vanity Fair, it seems important for there to be a variety of trans experiences for others to look to or learn from. We aren’t all mega rich and able to transition in the way she did. Neither do we all hurtle from one extreme of the gender binary to the other. The reality is that every individual’s experience is different.

Here is an excerpt from my interview in the next issue of Cleo magazine, out in Australia and New Zealand on 22 June.

It was obvious from a young age that I wasn’t at all sure about my gender. My mum used to tell me, ‘Don’t worry, you’ll figure it out eventually, and maybe enjoy wearing dresses and makeup,’ but, that day never came. When I was very little, I would talk openly about how I’d have a “sex change” when I was older. I don’t think I fully knew what it was or what it meant, but I’d evidently heard about it somewhere and knew that I wanted to become a boy – or a man. But as time went on it became clear this kind of talk made people feel uncomfortable, so I started keeping my thoughts to myself.

It wasn’t until I was at uni and saw a YouTube clip of a 14-year-old transgender boy in the US documenting his usage of hormone blockers that it finally clicked: ‘Oh my God – that’s me!’ I remember going to the gym after I’d watched it and I just couldn’t concentrate. After that day, I started daydreaming incessantly about what it would be like to transition, how I’d be able to tell people and what it’d be like for people to see me for how I was. The prospect of it all made me feel euphoric.

My daydreams ended when I realised how complicated it was all going to be. Firstly, taking testosterone hormones has its obstacles. Secondly, surgery made me nervous, and my family shared my concern. It’s not to be taken lightly. The biggest non-physical thing for me that made me hesitant was my concern at betraying women. I’d been raised as a feminist and felt that becoming a man was kind of saying that being a woman wasn’t good enough. That I didn’t have a right to act on this innate feeling that I was, I am, male. And I have to say, since transitioning, I’ve experienced a fuckload of male privilege.

As weird as it is to see myself, a thoroughly ordinary news journalist, in a place like Cleo, it is motivation enough to know that one person might read my story and feel less isolated.

https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/20/my-interview-for-cleo-magazine-and-why-i-did-it