Trans life: getting help from a gender clinic shouldn’t be a waiting game



Transgender is an umbrella term and it’s important not to forget the diversity beneath it. That said, there is one thing most trans people have in common and that’s the experience of waiting.

First, we wait for referrals from our GPs to a gender clinic. Or – even though the NHS recognises that being trans is not a mental illness – to a psychiatrist, who, I was apologetically told, had more authority to issue gender clinic referrals.

I felt different all my life but didn’t realise I could make the transition until 2010, when I was 23. I then made an appointment to see my GP. Waiting lists and administrative errors meant I didn’t see a gender specialist for another 23 months. That’s almost two years for a 40-minute conversation.

As far as I can tell, we wait in epic queues because there aren’t enough gender clinics. London and the south-east, for example, has one. Even though trans people represent a tiny proportion of the region’s roughly 17 million inhabitants, multi-year waits for treatment prove that one clinic is nowhere near enough.

A single extra clinic, as Green MP Caroline Lucas has called for in Brighton, would go a long way towards eradicating the administrative purgatory that can threaten someone’s mental health and heighten their risk of suicide.

I’ve come across the lay perception that there’s a clinical rationale for waiting. True, medical transition was once locked behind long, mandatory assessment periods. These one-size-fits-all standards are outdated. They stipulated other fun things too, such as being heterosexual and repelled by your own genitals. I and many other trans people would fail to tick any of these boxes and, thankfully, no longer have to.

For years I wondered why my body was in conflict with my otherwise healthy mind. By the time I made that GP appointment, I was trepidatious but I’d figured it out. When trans people seek medical intervention, it’s because we know what we need to live well. We know this in a way that no amount of training or empathy can approximate. And, knowing it, all we ask is for timely and reasonable NHS support that doesn’t make a tricky life even harder.

https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/21/trans-life-not-enough-gender-clinics