Trans life: getting the haircut you want isn’t always cut and dried



It is curious that hairdressing remains so gendered. There are barbers and there are salons. Yet look around and you’ll see men with long hair and women with short cuts. Wherever there is a large enough population, you will see as many gender-norm-defying hairstyles as you see brands of footwear. Where once a young David Bowie was interviewed on BBC Tonight about the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Long-haired Men, we now have the ubiquitous “man bun”.

Why is it that when you search for images of “short back and sides”, you get 99.9% male results? Or when you search for “choppy short hair”, the results are overwhelmingly female? As Greygory, my recently adopted barber, put it: “Wow. Gendered language.”

Greygory and his business partner Felix are the queer pioneers behind Open Barbers, a north London hair salon/social space where you will get the cut you want regardless of how you identify. Both trained as hairdressers after years of failing to get the cuts they wanted and hearing too many friends talk of similar frustrations.

Greygory’s chequered history with barbershops and salons, like mine, goes way back. As children assigned female genders, we encountered barbershops that wouldn’t cut our hair and salons that wouldn’t cut it how we wanted; too many boy-haired hopes lost in the mocking bounce of a bob cut. It sounds frivolous but the memories are bitter and tear-stained. As one’s self-identity is forming, repeat invalidation leaves deep scars.

Open Barbers assumed it would cater for queers. But, as its reputation for customer satisfaction grows, so does the diversity of its clientele, which now includes all varieties of LGBTQ people, and also their allies.

It isn’t revolutionary but that isn’t the point. Greygory and Felix don’t know why “open” haircutting is so rare, but their rapidly expanding customer base speaks for itself. It suggests that many people, gender-variant or not, are looking for an alternative to the binary world of barbershops and salons.

So, if you’ve ever been refused service or given the side-eye by someone who mistook hairdressing for a mandate to police your gender, visit Greygory. I came away with exactly what I wanted: the shortest cut of my life and no next-day regret.

https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jan/14/trans-life-getting-hair-cut-you-want