Trans life: school taught me that all kids should have the company of their queer peers



The proposal for a specialist school catering for LGBT pupils in Manchester strikes me as a terrible idea. Firstly, it’s an obvious victory for bullying. Perhaps less obviously, it seems unfair that non-LGBT kids who aren’t bullies should be deprived of the company of their queer peers. And lastly, at least in my experience, school should be where we all have opportunities to learn resilience.

I went to a tiny C of E state primary in rural Kent. Our uniform wasn’t strict: blue or grey stuff and preferably a sweater embroidered with the correct gold letters, chewed cuffs optional. But I remember going toe-to-toe with my headmistress about my freedom to wear shorts. Skirts, went my reasoning, made me want to puke. She insisted I should wear one “like the rest of the girls”. In the end, we compromised on culottes, which only made me want to retch slightly.

I didn’t know it, but I’d learned perhaps my first lesson about rubbing along in a world that thought differently to you about gender and identity.

At secondary school, I was bullied for the way I looked, and even for the way I stood. A boy once told me I’d look less “like a man” if a didn’t adopt such a wide stance. This was years before I had the confidence to sense that some variation on “looking like a man” was the solution rather than a problem. In the long run, these experiences made me stronger because they led me to forge allies and a support system. I learned that my rights to be there and to be myself were as incontrovertible as those of the bullies.

And when I say that removing LGBT pupils from state schools would deprive straight kids of our company and opportunities to learn about human diversity at a young age, I’m being utterly sincere. If you don’t learn these lessons then, adult life in today’s society will be an uphill battle.

My younger brother has always been one of my strongest allies. In his 16 years, he’s never once questioned who I am, or, in fact, who anyone is. It’s partly generational but open-mindedness is also – at some basic, developmental level – the gift of youth.

In this context, we must see bullies who are cruel enough to force peers out of mainstream education for the aberration they are. They, not LGBT kids, are the young people who will struggle to grow into confident and compassionate adults. They are the ones who really need our help.

https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jan/21/trans-life-school-taught-me-all-kids-should-have-company-queer-peers-lgbt