Does it mean I am gay or transsexual if I have fantasies about being a woman? | Mariella Frostrup



The dilemma I'm a 36-year-old guy and I've always considered myself straight on the whole. I have had many heterosexual relationships and one-night stands as well as a couple of homosexual "experiments" in my younger days, all of which I enjoyed. I've been single for a couple of years now and, while watching porn, I've had a lot of fantasies about being the girl, particularly when the video features one girl and several guys. I'm worried these fantasies mean I might be gay or transsexual, although this is not something I desire consciously. Do you think I should seek therapy?

Mariella replies Quit worrying. Desires and dreams that you don't play out in real life are called fantasies for that very reason. Pornography plays to our deepest desires and exists to do exactly what it says on the jacket. If it involves the exploitation of the weak or dispossessed, causes harm or inspires violence we need to employ our moral judgment about whether we want to indulge. But for adding frisson to our fantasies there's no question it can be a powerful tool.

When it comes to sex, exploring your imagination is just part of the fun and there are few among us who haven't conjured up scenarios we'd be very unlikely to embark on literally. If the X million readers of Fifty Shades of Grey were using it as a handbook there wouldn't be a pair of handcuffs or killer heels left unemployed between here and Vanuatu.

Yet, despite the omnipresence of sexual imagery and innuendo across our media and in advertising, there's a resounding silence around real sex in the UK. As a result it's easy to imagine yourself as some kind of freak just for stepping beyond the humdrum and letting your imagination take a leap. Gather a group of strangers of both genders together for a truthful discussion about their sex lives and you'll be transported to an alternative world, where sexual orientation exists on a Richter scale of impulses, and the most conventional among us have surprising – and others might say perverse – desires to confess.

The myth about what happens behind the twitching curtains of suburbia is not only potent but in most cases correct. Everyone has sexual fantasies, but surprisingly few are comfortable discussing them and even fewer take them to their natural conclusions in the real world. For most of us the joy of sex is that it allows us to escape and lose ourselves in a space where impulses and senses take precedence over expectation and rules.

The fact that you have these fantasies doesn't mean you are anything other than a human being with a capacity for imaginative carnal adventures. Whether you've been repressing instincts that you are uncomfortable about is worth exploring, but rather than contemplating that possibility with dread where's your sense of adventure? Your psyche could be leading you towards a truth about your own orientation and there's no harm in exploring those instincts as far as you feel comfortable. These desires aren't causing you pain or likely to cause anyone else harm so seeking a talking "cure" seems unnecessary at this point.

We live in a society and in an era when sexual experimentation has never been more acceptable. I'd be surprised if even among your close circle there aren't others with, at the very least, a fluid sexuality.

I'm all for personal privacy, but when it comes to the nation's favourite pastime it does seem odd that we can't talk about it in any meaningful or explorative way. We excel at sniggering and are gluttons for the dirty details of others' lives but averse to a frank conversation with lovers or friends about what we like, need or fantasise about.

I'm not a sex therapist, but there are plenty you can call on if you want a professional to dissect your dreams. Personally, as your unqualified confidante, I think you need to stop fretting, enjoy your fantasies and perhaps even think about acting them out. By all accounts the internet is a great place to find an enterprising playmate with similar tastes.

To read Pamela Connolly Stephenson's response to this dilemma, go to theguardian.com



If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk. Follow Mariella on Twitter @mariellaf1

https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/sep/22/fantasies-being-woman-gay-transsexual