Trans life: the benefits of a urinal-free world



There is an episode of the Simpsons in which Bart gets a job at a burlesque house. In one scene, he’s working the door when Grandpa Simpson arrives, whistling nonchalantly. Grandpa turns to hang his hat, keeps turning and notices his grandson Bart. Then, without stopping, he continues to turn, picks up his hat and leaves the same way he came in. It’s a perfectly smooth abort, the only giveaway being a slight widening of his eyes.

The clip is often shared in social media groups for trans men. Not because we are all huge Simpsons fans (though in my case this is true), but rather because this is the best representation of an experience only we can relate to – that of walking into the gents, seeing there’s no cubicle for a private pee, turning on your heels and walking straight out again.

It’s not that urinals are a no-go (I’ll let Google handle the ins and outs of this). But the space can be intimidating and, for those early in transition, unfamiliar. Many, trans or otherwise, prefer the privacy of a stall.

Recently, I’ve been wondering why all public loos can’t be gender-neutral cubicles with shared sink areas. This is increasingly common practice in the US, on UK university campuses and, more recently, in Brighton and Hove, thanks to the local council. Accessible loos are always gender neutral, as are those on trains and, weirdly, in many east-London hipster cafes.

The persistence of gender-segregated loos feels to me like a hangover from more prudish days of yore. There’s the vague idea that women’s loos are “safe spaces”, and harassment is real – but separation isn’t the answer, any more than telling women to “be safe” by not walking alone at night is the correct response to rape culture. Plus, many who are in transition, or whose gender expression is nonbinary, get accused of being in the “wrong” facility and thus find public loos, male or female, the exact opposite of safe.

True, men’s loos bear a much closer resemblance to open sewers than women’s. But perhaps if we shared, the unhygienic among us would be shamed into bucking up their ideas.

So how about a urinal-free world? I have yet to have an expert check my calculations, but … fewer urinals, fewer rooms and fewer walls equals a higher net total of cubicles and – drum roll, please – shorter queues. Surely that’s an idea everyone can get behind?

https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/19/trans-life-benefits-of-urinal-free-world