Problem solved



Our five-year-old daughter is the apple of our eyes. Until she was three and a half, she happily wore "girly" clothes as well as more gender-neutral outfits and has always loved imaginative play with dolls. I became pregnant when she was three, and we decided to find out the baby's gender to help her adjust to the idea.

It turned out that I was expecting a boy. At first she was upset and said she had wanted a sister, but as the weeks went by she seemed to adjust. Then one day she came into the kitchen with tears in her eyes and said, "I wish I was a boy."

I was taken aback. I asked why she felt like that, and she didn't really give me an answer.

Her brother is now 17 months old. She handled his arrival into the family very well and they get along. Our concern is that she occasionally says she wishes she were a boy and this week said, "I feel like a boy."

Tonight our daughter began to cry as I was putting her to bed, telling me that she wished she felt more like a girl. When I asked her to explain, she said feeling like a boy was keeping her from playing with the other girls as much as she would like. I said, as we have before, that it is perfectly fine to be a girl who feels like a boy, that there's nothing wrong with that.

Her best friend is much more stereotypically girly and when they have played at dressing-up the last two years or so, our daughter has often played the male role.

My husband and I are both troubled by the fact that our very happy, bright child might be feeling the pressures of gender stereotyping already – she seems to feel somehow different.

At your daughter's age, gender can be a very fixed idea. This tends to happen however they have been brought up, because of outside influences – television, friends, other family members etc. So a doll is a "girl thing"; playing football is a "boy thing". I know, it's annoying isn't it? But however progressive you may be, the general world lags behind ...

It sounds as if your daughter is struggling with the arrival of her brother. She will look for differences and try to bridge them. (So my eldest girl wants to be "little" because that's the only perceived difference between herself and her younger sister.)

Your daughter may also not feel very girly, and so be unlike the other girls in that respect. She may be a tomboy, as I was (I was 26 before I was able to call my bag a handbag).

I talked to Patrick Leman, who is professor of psychology at Royal Holloway, University of London and researches gender in childhood (bps.org.uk).

He said you re doing all the right things: being reassuring and keeping the lines of communication open, which is crucial. While people who grow up to feel they are the wrong gender (gender identity disorder) may report feeling that they were in the wrong body, or clothes, from an early age, lots of people who grow up perfectly happy with their gender can also go through stages of "playing with words and ideas".

"From the ages of five to six, children will get a lot of what being male or female is, but they will see gender as all or nothing up until about ages eight to nine."

In other words, up till the age of eight to nine they might see a boy picking up a doll as an "error".

Leman advised against over-monitoring your daughter as it could make her anxious or less able to express how she feels, if she senses that it upsets you. His advice is to just treat it like an interesting conversation; for example, answering her with, "Oh really?"

This will only become a problem if you fixate on it.

If your daughter is still expressing a desire to be a boy, or saying that she feels like a boy, when she reaches about 10 (and please note this isn't prescriptive) then Leman suggests: "It may be time for a more grown-up chat as they approach a different, more adolescent, set of questions about gender and relationships."

Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence.

https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/mar/17/annalisa-barbieri-problem-daughter-gender-brother