Trans life: injecting T is a tricky business – when you can’t get a needle



Testosterone (T) is usually injected and lots of trans guys do their own shots. For a short time I did too. For me it was about not having to rely on anyone else, with monthly GP visits.

Testosterone is thick, like olive oil, and is injected into deep muscle. So the needles are wide and long, and, I discovered, hard to come by. The difficulty I encountered wasn’t fear or lack of expertise: a wonderful nurse at the London gender clinic had taught many guys like me how to self-inject T. She seemed to understand we wanted ownership of this transition ritual. However, in this under-researched and under-resourced area of healthcare, there are practicalities the NHS is yet to formalise, or perhaps even be aware of. From what I can tell, much depends on where you live. My hurdle was that neither the gender clinic nor my GP prescribed needles and syringes. Both said it was the other’s responsibility.

Getting desperate in the lead-up to my first unsupervised shot, I went to King’s A&E in Camberwell. A kind nurse hooked me up, but said I shouldn’t come back. The next month, I went to a needle exchange in Soho. The staff couldn’t tell me if the needle I needed came in the kit they gave to intravenous drug users. They said I had to take it home sealed. Outside, I found the bag’s contents – small needles, spoons, condoms – were of no use to me.

After several more dead ends, I found another needle exchange at a high street chemist. Again, I couldn’t check the kit there. I explained that I wasn’t an addict and produced my testosterone prescription. It didn’t help. After placing the kit in front of me, the assistant took a step back. I walked out to just beyond the threshold of the store, turned to face him and opened the bag. Again, the right needle wasn’t there. I went back to return the kit so it could be disposed of safely. Refusing to touch any part of the bag again, the assistant lifted up a large bin and motioned for me to stretch over the counter to drop the bag inside. It got jammed halfway, so he put the bin down and picked up a large bottle of cough syrup to force the bag inside. I felt increasingly humiliated.

Eventually, I found what I needed online and a short time after that switched to a new form of T. Now I only have a shot every 12 weeks. And it’s a big one – 1,000mg – so I leave it to the pros. I hope my needle exchange experience was a unique piece of bad luck caused by one GP surgery’s thoughtlessness. It isn’t nice being made to feel infected or unclean: no one deserves that kind of interaction.

https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/25/injecting-t-needle-life-transition