Transparent: finally, a realistic portrayal of finding your style as a transgender woman



From the awards lavished on TV show Transparent, which returned for a second series last week, to the fame of Caitlyn Jenner, Laverne Cox, Lea T, Andreja Pejic and Janet Mock, trans issues have never had such a high profile in the media as they do now.

Fashion has played a huge part in the media’s apparent acceptance of Jenner in particular, with the press gleefully complimenting her every Issa dress and Versace gown. But while the positive reception has been heartening in many ways, the excitement can wear a little thin when it bears so little relation to reality for the rest of us. 



As a stylist, makeup artist and a transgender woman, I am acutely aware that the way trans people look is often a huge part of our lives; we are are all on a voyage of discovery and fashion can be used to present ourselves as we feel. But while celebrities often have vast reserves of disposable income, fashion industry contacts, makeup artists and photographers at their disposal, many trans women exist at the peripheries of society and face quite the opposite scenario.

Unemployment and homelessness are rampant in the trans community, so buying designer clothes is usually an impossibility. Having £50, at best, in your pocket for an entire new look is much more realistic. Shopping on the high street can be an alienating experience, particularly in the early stages of your transition, when insecurities may be on fire and even the smallest thing can feel like a significant setback. I remember being pointed at, stared at, laughed at, and even having my photograph taken while shopping just because I looked different.

Trans women are often completely new to putting an outfit together, so you’re trying to discover yourself while you shop, which involves a lot of trial and error, and adds stress to the process.

That’s why I would not look to Jenner but to Maura, the lead character in Transparent, for a realistic depiction of finding one’s style as a trans woman. When Maura first comes out, and in flashback scenes, her styling reflects how fragile and uncomfortable one can feel in those fledgling stages of your transition. Later, as she is able to relax and find her feet within her family unit, Maura’s flashy sequin-covered dresses and prominent shoulder pads are left behind; her look noticeably softens. She seems to have found her own personal style, wearing soft layers with boho skirts, kaftans and resin accessories; a look that always feels relaxed and reflects her personality and growing confidence.

Like Maura, it took me a while to find my style. I have always had an eye for fashion – I was a punk from the age of about 13 when I used clothes as way to reclaim my body and make a statement when facing male puberty – but early in my transition I combined that aesthetic with a highly feminine silhouette: six-inch stilettos and miniskirts, which I wore in the daytime, as if ready for a night on the tiles at 8am. I had an epiphany when a friend asked: “Why don’t you just buy some leggings and some nice tops?” Once the way I dressed started to change, so did the world around me, to a degree.

Now, when I give trans women styling advice, I suggest searching for simple pieces such as great-fitting jeans, a few dresses, tops and jackets in more neutral tones, that can be layered in multiple ways or dressed up with statement jewellery as your confidence grows. I always look to unlock their personal style: everyone has their own body shape and tastes, an important fact that can be corrupted by fashion’s shifting trends. I’ve found that ignoring fashion is actually the best thing to do: it’s much more important to discover your body shape and dress to it and to be as daring or as subtle as you want to be.

The depiction of the trans experience in Transparent is very honest and real in its emphasis not just on Maura’s experience but her family’s journey. It is also realistic in showing that most transgender women don’t look like Caitlyn Jenner, just as most men don’t resemble the skewed, celebrity versions of the model man.

If the spotlight shining on the transgender community offers a gateway to honest discussion, improved visibility and better representation, then that’s a good thing. If it views it through a Hollywood-spangled lens that steals the limelight completely, or puts unreasonable expectations on other trans women, then that’s good enough reason to reject it. When you consider the cold truth, the intense pressure that Jenner is now under isn’t something that many trans women would wish on themselves. Not for all the clothes in the world.

Grace Oni Smith is co-founder and style director of the UK’s first transgender confidence consultancy, Born

https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/09/transparent-finally-a-realistic-portrayal-of-finding-your-style-as-a-transgender-woman