Kim Kardashian may have broken the internet, but Caitlyn Jenner united it

Fashion,Caitlyn Jenner,Transgender,Magazines,Inequality,Society,Newspapers & magazines,Media,Kendall Jenner

Caitlyn Jenner’s Vanity Fair cover was expected to create a controversial, watercooler cultural moment, but it turned into something much more extraordinary. Because the image of Caitlyn Jenner – winner of an Olympic gold medal as a man named Bruce, and member of the Kardashians, the family pop culture loves to hate – brought no controversy, only applause. Kim Kardashian may have broken the internet, but Caitlyn Jenner did something even more astonishing. She united it.

Jenner, Annie Leibovitz and Vanity Fair produced an image that won the world over. And this, in a society where acceptance and understanding of transgender issues – while progressing – is still in its infancy. The magazine is not yet on newsstands, and while the interview is available online for digital subscribers, the overwhelming majority of comment has been based on the cover image. In it, Jenner wears an ivory satin corset, so that her cinched waist, falling just above the coverline (“Call me Caitlyn”) forms the central focus. An hourglass woman’s body in white, in a 1950s cut bodice, surely references Marilyn Monroe – in the minds of Leibovitz and the Vanity Fair art directors, anyway, if not of Jenner. Monroe stands for all-Americanism, for blue-chip Hollywood glamour (as opposed, perhaps, to the modern Kardashian brand of fame), for ultimate femininity and for vulnerability. But while Jenner’s hands are out of shot, behind her back, the photo spotlights the strong muscles of her arms and thighs, reminding us of those Olympic medals, and serving as an antidote to the unguarded, exposed, Monroe-ish appeal of her corsetted waist and coy, expression, half-turned from the camera.

In guidelines reissued yesterday, the media-monitoring organisation GLAAD warns against “superficial critiques of a transgender person’s femininity or masculinity. Commenting on how well a transgender person conforms to conventional standards of femininity or masculinity is reductive and insulting.” I hope it does not break these guidelines to say that the cover image draws on the iconography of strong American women. Jessica Lange, to whom many have noticed a resemblance, has had a four-decade acting career. (Next spring, Lange will return to Broadway, starring alongside Gabriel Byrne in a revival of the Eugene O’Neill play A Long Day’s Journey Into Night.) Cindy Crawford, of whom Jenner’s Coke-can curls and athletic body are also reminiscent, has sustained a modelling career since the 1980s, and most recently starred as the take-no-prisoners Headmistress in the music video for Taylor Swift’s Bad Blood. Lena Dunham captured the spirit of the image immediately after its release, when she tweeted: “I just want Caitlyn Jenner to take me out and teach me how to drive a stick shift in heels.”

The stylist of the shoot, Jessica Diehl, has described Jenner as “all-American in so many ways”. Diehl moodboarded images of Lauren Bacall, and Rene Russo in The Thomas Crown Affair when the looks were being planned, “and just vintage photographs of old Hollywood stars. A couple of Jackie Kennedys are never wrong.” The state of semi-undress she explains as simple openness. “It was not meant to be risque in any way. It was really meant to show with all honesty and purity, ‘This is what is going on. Here I am.’” Although the ivory corset and Jenner’s demure pose are not a million miles away from Kim and Kanye’s April 2014 American Vogue cover, for which Kim Kardashian wore a strapless ivory silk Lanvin gown, Diehl sees her shoot as putting deliberate distance between Caitlyn-with-a-C and the K-word. “Coming from a very fashion-forward family, we sort of thought that the nicest thing to do was to focus on style over fashion.”

But that is only half the story, because the Kardashians are at the heart of what happened on Monday. Caitlyn Jenner, who launched her Twitter account to coincide with the cover reveal, set a new record by reaching 1 million followers in four hours and three minutes. At the time of writing, she was almost at 2 million, having tweeted just three times. President Obama – whose five-hour record Jenner broke to reach her first million Twitter followers – responded with public support, telling Jenner “your story matters”. Celebrities from Maria Shriver to Ellen DeGeneres, Lady Gaga to Mia Farrow, flooded the internet with messages of congratulation and welcome. It is Jenner’s connection to the Kardashian family (she was married to matriarch Kris for 14 years until their divorce earlier this year) that has put a transgender woman on the cover of a glossy magazine. Kim Kardashian’s tweet in support of her former stepfather – “How beautiful! Be happy, be proud, live life YOUR way!” has been retweeted 28,000 times.

Back in February, when discussion and speculation about Jenner’s transgender identity was gathering pace, the novelist Curtis Sittenfeld, author of American Wife, tweeted this: “What if it turns out all along Kim Kardashian’s butt has been a Trojan horse for greater compassion & acceptance of transgender people?” It was a light-hearted comment, but Sittenfeld’s point is an intriguing one. The Kardashians are, arguably, the most famous family in the world. Keeping Up With The Kardashians is now in its 10th series, with viewing figures still over 2 million. The pop-cultural power of this is without precedent. (Imagine what Dallas would have been if the Ewings had been real people, Instagramming their Southfork barbecues.) And yet, despite their money (Kris Jenner’s net worth is estimated at $125m), their fame, their connections in music and fashion (Kim is married to Kanye West; Kendall is best mates with Cara Delevingne), they have been summarily dismissed by the self-appointed keepers of pop-cultural fame as vacuous and irritating. And indeed, to date, Kardashian storylines have been trashily tabloid: sex tapes, 72-day marriages, diets and plastic surgery.

But in a plot twist that even the Dallas screenwriters could not have dreamed up, the first family of the reality TV generation have, with the Jenner story, become catalysts for progressive social change. Brave and brilliant work for acceptance is being done by those passionate about equality, but the bald reality is that 140 characters by Kim Kardashian have more impact on cultural mores than any number of obscure activists preaching the same thing.

Less than two years ago, Chelsea Manning, the morning after being sentenced to 35 years in prison, issued a statement requesting that the media use her new name and the feminine pronoun. “Bradley Manning says he wants to live as a woman,” reported the Associated Press; almost every major US newspaper continued to use the male pronoun. The contrast with the media acceptance of Jenner could hardly be more marked. And while the reception given to Manning’s announcement reflected public ambivalence about the trial that preceded it, the acceptance of Jenner is also, surely, a direct result of the Kardashians’ fame. The Kardashians, in all their eccentricities – who can forget that Kim’s 14th birthday party was held at Neverland – have become part of the fabric of public life. Kim and her sisters have not only publicly celebrated Caitlyn’s Vanity Fair portfolio, but also talked openly about their support and understanding for their mother, Kris, as she tries to reconcile memories of her marriage with this new reality. A combination of fame and social media reach means that these complex and nuanced issues around a transgender woman and her family are being explored, in real time and on pop-cultural primetime.

One person, naturally, foretold long ago that the Kardashians would one day be understood as a dynasty of great significance. Last year, when Kanye and Kim became the first mixed-race couple to appear on the cover of Vogue, West said the magazine cover was the first moment at which people “understood” his marriage, after “two years of people not understanding an interracial relationship”. The previous year, West said in a radio interview that “a lot of what the Kardashians do, I don’t think they get enough credit for. They prep America to accept interracial relationships.” Last year, Kim Kardashian wrote on her website that “I feel a responsibility as a mother, a public figure, a human being, to do what I can to make sure that not only my child, but all children, don’t have to grow up in a world where they are judged by the colour of their skin, or their gender, or their sexual orientation.”

Like it or not, the Kardashians have done something positive, progressive and meaningful. The internet era of baring all can be a beautiful thing: prejudice can wither and fall, and acceptance and understanding blossom in its place. And I’m not just talking about Caitlyn Jenner.

https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/02/caitlyn-jenner-vanity-fair-cover-kim-kardashian-unites-acceptance-transgender-issues